 The "Aldine" Edition of

               The Arabian Nights Entertainments

                   Illustrated by S. L. Wood

              FROM THE TEXT OF DR. JONATHAN SCOTT

                        
THE STORY OF SINBAD THE VOYAGER.
The First Voyage.
The Second Voyage.
The Third Voyage.
The Fourth Voyage.
The Fifth Voyage.
The Sixth Voyage.
The Seventh and Last Voyage.




                THE STORY OF SINBAD THE VOYAGER.



In the reign of the same caliph Haroun al Rusheed, whom I have
already mentioned, there lived at Bagdad a poor porter called
Hindbad. One day, when the weather was excessively hot, he was
employed to carry a heavy burden from one end of the town to the
other. Being much fatigued, and having still a great way to go,
he came into a street where a refreshing breeze blew on his face,
and the pavement was sprinkled with rose-water. As he could not
desire a better place to rest and recruit himself, he took off
his load and sat upon it, near a large mansion.

He was much pleased that he stopped in this place; for the
agreeable smell of wood of aloes, and of pastils that came from
the house, mixing with the scent of the rose-water, completely
perfumed and embalmed the air. Besides, he heard from within a
concert of instrumental music, accompanied with the harmonious
notes of nightingales, and other birds, peculiar to the climate.
This charming melody, and the smell of several sorts of savoury
dishes, made the porter conclude there was a feast, with great
rejoicings within. His business seldom leading him that way, he
knew not to whom the mansion belonged; but to satisfy his
curiosity, he went to some of the servants, whom he saw standing
at the gate in magnificent apparel, and asked the name of the
proprietor. "How," replied one of them, "do you live in Bagdad,
and know not that this is the house of Sinbad, the sailor, that
famous voyager, who has sailed round the world?" The porter, who
had heard of this Sinbad's riches, could not but envy a man whose
condition he thought to be as happy as his own was deplorable:
and his mind being fretted with these reflections, he lifted up
his eyes to heaven, and said loud enough to be heard, "Almighty
creator of all things, consider the difference between Sinbad and
me! I am every day exposed to fatigues and calamities, and can
scarcely get coarse barley-bread for myself and my family, whilst
happy Sinbad profusely expends immense riches, and leads a life
of continual pleasure. What has he done to obtain from thee a lot
so agreeable? And what have I done to deserve one so wretched?"
Having finished his expostulation, he struck his foot against the
ground, like a man absorbed in grief and despair.

Whilst the porter was thus indulging his melancholy, a servant
came out of the house, and taking him by the arm, bade him follow
him, for Sinbad, his master, wanted to speak to him.

Sir, your majesty may easily imagine, that the repining Hindbad
was not a little surprised at this compliment. For, considering
what he had said, he was afraid Sinbad had sent for him to punish
him: therefore he would have excused himself, alleging, that he
could not leave his burden in the middle of the street. But
Sinbad's servants assured him they would look to it, and were so
urgent with him, that he was obliged to yield.

The servants brought him into a great hall, where a number of
people sat round a table, covered with all sorts of savoury
dishes. At the upper end sat a comely venerable gentleman, with a
long white beard, and behind him stood a number of officers and
domestics, all ready to attend his pleasure. This personage was
Sinbad. The porter, whose fear was increased at the sight of so
many people, and of a banquet so sumptuous, saluted the company
trembling. Sinbad bade him draw near, and seating him at his
right hand, served him himself, and gave him excellent wine, of
which there was abundance upon the sideboard.

When the repast was over, Sinbad addressed his conversation to
Hindbad; and calling him brother, according to the manner of the
Arabians, when they are familiar one with another, enquired his
name and employment.

"My lord," answered he, "my name is Hindbad." "I am very glad to
see you," replied Sinbad; "and I daresay the same on behalf of
all the company: but I wish to hear from your own mouth what it
was you lately said in the street." Sinbad had himself heard the
porter complain through the window, and this it was that induced
him to have him brought in.

At this request, Hindbad hung down his head in confusion, and
replied, "My lord, I confess that my fatigue put me out of
humour, and occasioned me to utter some indiscreet words, which I
beg you to pardon." "Do not think I am so unjust," resumed
Sinbad, "as to resent such a complaint. I consider your
condition, and instead of upbraiding, commiserate you. But I must
rectify your error concerning myself. You think, no doubt, that I
have acquired, without labour and trouble, the ease and
indulgence which I now enjoy. But do not mistake; I did not
attain to this happy condition, without enduring for several
years more trouble of body and mind than can well be imagined.
Yes, gentlemen," he added, speaking to the whole company, "I can
assure you, my troubles were so extraordinary, that they were
calculated to discourage the most covetous from undertaking such
voyages as I did, to acquire riches. Perhaps you have never heard
a distinct account of my wonderful adventures, and the dangers I
encountered, in my seven voyages; and since I have this
opportunity, I will give you a faithful account of them, not
doubting but it will be acceptable."

As Sinbad wished to relate his adventures chiefly on the porter's
account, he ordered his burden to be carried to the place of its
destination, and then proceeded.




                       The First Voyage.



I inherited from my father considerable property, the greater
part of which I squandered in my youth in dissipation; but I
perceived my error, and reflected that riches were perishable,
and quickly consumed by such ill managers as myself. I farther
considered, that by my irregular way of living I wretchedly
misspent my time; which is, of all things, the most valuable. I
remembered the saying of the great Solomon, which I had
frequently heard from my father; That death is more tolerable
than poverty. Struck with these reflections, I collected the
remains of my fortune, and sold all my effects by public auction.
I then entered into a contract with some merchants, who traded by
sea. I took the advice of such as I thought most capable of
assisting me: and resolving to improve what money I had, I went
to Bussorah, and embarked with several merchants on board a ship
which we had jointly fitted out.

We set sail, and steered our course towards the Indies, through
the Persian gulf, which is formed by the coasts of Arabia Felix
on the right, and by those of Persia on the left, and, according
to common opinion is seventy leagues wide at the broadest place.
The eastern sea, as well as that of the Indies, is very spacious.
It is bounded on one side by the coasts of Abyssinia, and is
4,500 leagues in length to the isles of Vakvak. At first I was
troubled with the sea-sickness, but speedily recovered my health,
and was not afterwards subject to that complaint.

In our voyage we touched at several islands, where we sold or
exchanged our goods. One day, whilst under sail, we were becalmed
near a small island, but little elevated above the level of the
water, and resembling a green meadow. The captain ordered his
sails to be furled, and permitted such persons as were so
inclined to land; of this number I was one.

But while we were enjoying ourselves in eating and drinking, and
recovering ourselves from the fatigue of the sea, the island on a
sudden trembled, and shook us terribly.

The trembling of the island was perceived on board the ship, and
we were called upon to re-embark speedily, or we should all be
lost; for what we took for an island proved to be the back of a
sea monster. The nimblest got into the sloop, others betook
themselves to swimming; but for myself I was still upon the back
of the creature, when he dived into the sea, and I had time only
to catch hold of a piece of wood that we had brought out of the
ship to make a fire. Meanwhile, the captain, having received
those on board who were in the sloop, and taken up some of those
that swam, resolved to improve the favourable gale that had just
risen, and hoisting his sails pursued his voyage, so that it was
impossible for me to recover the ship.

Thus was I exposed to the mercy of the waves. I struggled for my
life all the rest of the day and the following night. By this
time I found my strength gone, and despaired of saving my life,
when happily a wave threw me against an island, The bank was high
and rugged; so that I could scarcely have got up, had it not been
for some roots of trees, which fortune seemed to have preserved
in this place for my safety. Having reached the land, I lay down
upon the ground half dead, until the sun appeared. Then, though I
was very feeble, both from hard labour and want of food, I crept
along to find some herbs fit to eat, and had the good luck not
only to procure some, but likewise to discover a spring of
excellent water, which contributed much to recover me. After this
I advanced farther into the island, and at last reached a fine
plain, where at a great distance I perceived a horse feeding. I
went towards it, fluctuating between hope and fear, for I knew
not whether in advancing I was more likely to endanger or to
preserve my life. As I approached, I perceived it to be a very
fine mare, tied to a stake. Whilst I was admiring its beauty, I
heard from beneath the voice of a man, who immediately appeared,
and asked me who I was? I related to him my adventure, after
which, taking me by the hand, he led me into a cave, where there
were several other people, no less amazed to see me than I was to
see them.

I partook of some provisions which they offered me. I then asked
them what they did in such a desert place? to which they
answered, that they were grooms belonging to Maha-raja, sovereign
of the island; that every year, at the same season, they brought
thither the king's mares, and fastened them as I had seen, until
they were covered by a sea-horse, who afterwards endeavoured to
destroy the mares; but was prevented by their noise, and obliged
to return to the sea. The mares when in foal were taken back, and
the horses thus produced were kept for the king's use, and called
seahorses. They added, that they were to return home on the
morrow, and had I been one day later, I must have perished,
because the inhabited part of the island was at a great distance,
and it would have been impossible for me to have got thither
without a guide.

While they entertained me thus, the horse came out of the sea, as
they had told me, covered the mare, and afterwards would have
devoured her; but upon a great noise made by the grooms, he left
her, and plunged into the sea.

Next morning they returned with their mares to the capital of the
island, took me with them, and presented me to the Maha-raja. He
asked me who I was, and by what adventure I had come into his
dominions? After I had satisfied him, he told me he was much
concerned for my misfortune, and at the same time ordered that I
should want nothing; which commands his officers were so generous
and careful as to see exactly fulfilled.

Being a merchant, I frequented men of my own profession, and
particularly enquired for those who were strangers, that perchance I
might hear news from Bagdad, or find an opportunity to return. For the
Maha-raja's capital is situated on the sea-coast, and has a fine
harbour, where ships arrive daily from the different quarters of the
world. I frequented also the society of the learned Indians, and took
delight to hear them converse; but withal, I took care to make my
court regularly to the Maha-raja, and conversed with the governors and
petty kings, his tributaries, that were about him. They put a thousand
questions respecting my country; and I being willing to inform myself
as to their laws and customs, asked them concerning every thing which
I thought worth knowing.

There belongs to this king an island named Cassel. They assured
me that every night a noise of drums was heard there, whence the
mariners fancied that it was the residence of Degial. I
determined to visit this wonderful place, and in my way thither
saw fishes of 100 and 200 cubits long, that occasion more fear
than hurt; for they are so timorous, that they will fly upon the
rattling of two sticks or boards. I saw likewise other fish about
a cubit in length, that had heads like owls.

As I was one day at the port after my return, a ship arrived, and
as soon as she cast anchor, they began to unload her, and the
merchants on board ordered their goods to be carried into the
customhouse. As I cast my eye upon some bales, and looked to the
name, I found my own, and perceived the bales to be the same that
I had embarked at Bussorah. I also knew the captain; but being
persuaded that he believed me to be drowned, I went, and asked
him whose bales these were? He replied, that they belonged to a
merchant at Bagdad, called Sinbad, who came to sea with him; but
one day, being near an island, as was supposed, he went ashore,
with several other passengers, upon this island, which was only a
monstrous fish, that lay asleep upon the the sur-face of the
water: but as soon as he felt the heat of the fire they had
kindled upon his back, to dress some victuals, began to move, and
dived under water. Most of the persons who were upon him
perished, and among them the unfortunate Sinbad. Those bales
belonged to him, and I am resolved to trade with them until I
meet with some of his family, to whom I may return the profit. "I
am that Sinbad," said I, "whom you thought to be dead, and those
bales are mine."

When the captain heard me speak thus, "Heavens!" he exclaimed,
"whom can we trust in these times? There is no faith left among
men. I saw Sinbad perish with my own eyes, as did also the
passengers on board, and yet you tell me you are that Sinbad.
What impudence is this? To look on you, one would take you to be
a man of probity, and yet you tell a horrible falsehood, in order
to possess yourself of what does not belong to you." "Have
patience," replied I; "do me the favour to hear what I have to
say." "Very well," said he, "speak, I am ready to hear you." Then
I told him how I had escaped, and by what adventure I met with
the grooms of Maha-raja, who had brought me to his court.

His confidence began to abate upon this declaration, and he was
at length persuaded that I was no cheat: for there came people
from his ship who knew me, paid me great compliments, and
expressed much joy at seeing me alive. At last he recollected me
himself, and embracing me, "Heaven be praised," said he, "for
your happy escape. I cannot express the joy it affords, me; there
are your goods, take and do with them as you please." I thanked
him, acknowledged his probity, and in requital, offered him part
of my goods as a present, which he generously refused.

I took out what was most valuable in my bales, and presented them
to the Maha-raja, who, knowing my misfortune, asked me how I came
by such rarities. I acquainted him with the circumstance of their
recovery. He was pleased at my good luck, accepted my present,
and in return gave me one much more considerable. Upon this, I
took leave of him, and went aboard the same ship, after I had
exchanged my goods for the commodities of that country. I carried
with me wood of aloes, sandal, camphire, nutmegs, cloves, pepper,
and ginger. We passed by several islands, and at last arrived at
Bussorah, from whence I came to this city, with the value of
100,000 sequins. My family and I received one another with all
the transports of sincere affection. I bought slaves of both
sexes, and a landed estate, and built a magnificent house. Thus I
settled myself, resolving to forget the miseries I had suffered,
and to enjoy the pleasures of life.

Sinbad stopped here, and ordered the musicians to proceed with
their concert, which the story had interrupted. The company
continued enjoying themselves till the evening, and it was time
to retire, when Sinbad sent for a purse of 100 sequins and giving
it to the porter, said, "Take this, Hindbad, return to your home,
and come back to-morrow to hear more of my adventures." The
porter went away, astonished at the honour done, and the present
made him. The account of this adventure proved very agreeable to
his wife and children, who did not fail to return thanks to God
for what providence had sent him by the hand of Sinbad.

Hindbad put on his best apparel next day, and returned to the
bountiful traveller, who received him with a pleasant air, and
welcomed him heartily. When all the guests had arrived, dinner
was served, and continued a long time. When it was ended, Sinbad,
addressing himself to the company, said, "Gentlemen, be pleased
to listen to the adventures of my second voyage; they deserve
your attention even more than those of the first." Upon which
every one held his peace, and Sinbad proceeded.




                       The Second Voyage.



I designed, after my first voyage, to spend the rest of my days
at Bagdad, as I had the honour to tell you yesterday; but it was
not long ere I grew weary of an indolent life. My inclination to
trade revived. I bought goods proper for the commerce I intended,
and put to sea a second time with merchants of known probity. We
embarked on board a good ship, and after recommending ourselves
to God, set sail. We traded from island to island, and exchanged
commodities with great profit. One day we landed in an island
covered with several sorts of fruit-trees, but we could see
neither man nor animal. We went to take a little fresh air in the
meadows, along the streams that watered them. Whilst some
diverted themselves with gathering flowers, and other fruits, I
took my wine and provisions, and sat down near a stream betwixt
two high trees, which formed a thick shade. I made a good meal,
and afterwards fell asleep. I cannot tell how long I slept, but
when I awoke the ship was gone.

I was much alarmed at finding the ship gone. I got up and looked
around me, but could not see one of the merchants who landed with
me. I perceived the ship under sail, but at such a distance, that
I lost sight of her in a short time.

I leave you to guess at my melancholy reflections in this sad
condition: I was ready to die with grief. I cried out in agony;
beat my head and breast, and threw myself upon the ground, where
I lay some time in despair, one afflicting thought being
succeeded by another still more afflicting. I upbraided myself a
hundred times for not being content with the produce of my first
voyage, that might have sufficed me all my life. But all this was
in vain, and my repentance too late.

At last I resigned myself to the will of God. Not knowing what to
do, I climbed up to the top of a lofty tree, from whence I looked
about on all sides, to see if I could discover any thing that
could give me hopes. When I gazed towards the sea I could see
nothing but sky and water; but looking over the land I beheld
something white; and coming down, I took what provision I had
left, and went towards it, the distance being so great, that I
could not distinguish what it was.

As I approached, I thought it to be a white dome, of a prodigious
height and extent; and when I came up to it, I touched it, and
found it to be very smooth. I went round to see if it was open on
any side, but saw it was not, and that there was no climbing up
to the top as it was so smooth. It was at least fifty paces
round.

By this time the sun was about to set, and all of a sudden the
sky became as dark as if it had been covered with a thick cloud.
I was much astonished at this sudden darkness, but much more when
I found it occasioned by a bird of a monstrous size, that came
flying toward me. I remembered that I had often heard mariners
speak of a miraculous bird called Roc, and conceived that the
great dome which I so much admired must be its egg. In short, the
bird alighted, and sat over the egg. As I perceived her coming, I
crept to the egg, so that I had before me one of the legs of the
bird, which was as big as the trunk of a tree. I tied myself
strongly to it with my turban, in hopes that the roc next morning
would carry me with her out of this desert island. After having
passed the night in this condition, the bird flew away as soon as
it was daylight, and carried me so high, that I could not discern
the earth; she afterwards descended with so much rapidity that I
lost my senses. But when I found myself on the ground, I speedily
untied the knot, and had scarcely done so, when the roc, having
taken up a serpent of a monstrous length in her bill, flew away.

The spot where it left me was encompassed on all sides by
mountains, that seemed to reach above the clouds, and so steep
that there was no possibility of getting out of the valley. This
was a new perplexity: so that when I compared this place with the
desert island from which the roc had brought me, I found that I
had gained nothing by the change.

As I walked through this valley, I perceived it was strewed with
diamonds, some of which were of a surprising bigness. I took
pleasure in looking upon them; but shortly saw at a distance such
objects as greatly diminished my satisfaction, and which I could
not view without terror, namely, a great number of serpents, so
monstrous, that the least of them was capable of swallowing an
elephant. They retired in the day-time to their dens, where they
hid themselves from the roc their enemy, and came out only in the
night.

I spent the day in walking about in the valley, resting myself at
times in such places as I thought most convenient. When night
came on, I went into a cave, where I thought I might repose in
safety. I secured the entrance, which was low and narrow, with a
great stone to preserve me from the serpents; but not so far as
to exclude the light. I supped on part of my provisions, but the
serpents, which began hissing round me, put me into such extreme
fear, that you may easily imagine I did not sleep. When day
appeared, the serpents retired, and I came out of the cave
trembling. I can justly say, that I walked upon diamonds, without
feeling any inclination to touch them. At last I sat down, and
notwithstanding my apprehensions, not having closed my eyes
during the night, fell asleep, after having eaten a little more
of my provision. But I had scarcely shut my eyes, when something
that fell by me with a great noise awaked me. This was a large
piece of raw meat; and at the same time I saw several others fall
down from the rocks in different places.

I had always regarded as fabulous what I had heard sailors and
others relate of the valley of diamonds, and of the stratagems
employed by merchants to obtain jewels from thence; but now I
found that they had stated nothing but truth. For the fact is,
that the merchants come to the neighbourhood of this valley, when
the eagles have young ones, and throwing great joints of meat
into the valley, the diamonds, upon whose points they fall, stick
to them; the eagles, which are stronger in this country than any
where else, pounce with great force upon those pieces of meat,
and carry them to their nests on the precipices of the rocks to
feed their young: the merchants at this time run to their nests,
disturb and drive off the eagles by their shouts, and take away
the diamonds that stick to the meat.

Until I perceived the device I had concluded it to be impossible
for me to get from this abyss, which I regarded as my grave; but
now I changed my opinion, and began to think upon the means of my
deliverance.

I began to collect together the largest diamonds I could find,
and put them into the leather bag in which I used to carry my
provisions. I afterwards took the largest of the pieces of meat,
tied it close round me with the cloth of my turban, and then laid
myself upon the ground with my face downward, the bag of diamonds
being made fast to my girdle.

I had scarcely placed myself in this posture when the eagles
came. Each of them seized a piece of meat, and one of the
strongest having taken me up, with the piece of meat to which I
was fastened, carried me to his nest on the top of the mountain.
The merchants immediately began their shouting to frighten the
eagles; and when they had obliged them to quit their prey, one of
them came to the nest where I was. He was much alarmed when he
saw me; but recovering himself, instead of enquiring how I came
thither began to quarrel with me, and asked, why I stole his
goods? "You will treat me," replied I, "with more civility, when
you know me better. Do not be uneasy, I have diamonds enough for
you and myself, more than all the other merchants together.
Whatever they have they owe to chance, but I selected for myself
in the bottom of the valley those which you see in this bag." I
had scarcely done speaking, when the other merchants came
crowding about us, much astonished to see me; but they were much
more surprised when I told them my story. Yet they did not so
much admire my stratagem to effect my deliverance, as my courage
in putting it into execution.

They conducted me to their encampment, and there having opened my
bag, they were surprised at the largeness of my diamonds, and
confessed that in all the courts which they had visited they had
never seen any of such size and perfection. I prayed the
merchant, who owned the nest to which I had been carried (for
every merchant had his own), to take as many for his share as he
pleased. He contented himself with one, and that too the least of
them; and when I pressed him to take more, without fear of doing
me any injury, "No," said he, "I am very well satisfied with
this, which is valuable enough to save me the trouble of making
any more voyages, and will raise as great a fortune as I desire."

I spent the night with the merchants, to whom I related my story
a second time, for the satisfaction of those who had not heard
it. I could not moderate my joy when I found myself delivered
from the danger I have mentioned. I thought myself in a dream,
and could scarcely believe myself out of danger.

The merchants had thrown their pieces of meat into the valley for
several days. And each of them being satisfied with the diamonds
that had fallen to his lot, we left the place the next morning,
and travelled near high mountains, where there were serpents of a
prodigious length, which we had the good fortune to escape. We
took shipping at the first port we reached, and touched at the
isle of Roha, where the trees grow that yield camphire. This tree
is so large, and its branches so thick, that one hundred men may
easily sit under its shade. The juice, of which the camphire is
made, exudes from a hole bored in the upper part of the tree, is
received in a vessel, where it thickens to a consistency, and
becomes what we call camphire; after the juice is thus drawn out,
the tree withers and dies.

In this island is also found the rhinoceros, an animal less than
the elephant, but larger than the buffalo. It has a horn upon its
nose, about a cubit in length; this horn is solid, and cleft
through the middle, upon this may be seen white lines,
representing the figure of a man. The rhinoceros fights with the
elephant, runs his horn into his belly, and carries him off upon
his head but the blood and the fat of the elephant running into
his eyes, and making him blind, he falls to the ground; and then,
strange to relate! the roc comes and carries them both away in
her claws, for food for her young ones.

I pass over many other things peculiar to this island, lest I
should be troublesome to you. Here I exchanged some of my
diamonds for merchandize. From hence we went to other islands,
and at last, having touched at several trading towns of the
continent, we landed at Bussorah, from whence I proceeded to
Bagdad. There I immediately gave large presents to the poor, and
lived honourably upon the vast riches I had brought, and gained
with so much fatigue.

Thus Sinbad ended the relation of the second voyage, gave Hindbad
another hundred sequins, and invited him to come the next day to
hear the account of the third. The rest of the guests returned to
their homes, and came again the following day at the same hour,
and one may be sure the porter did not fail, having by this time
almost forgotten his former poverty. When dinner was over, Sinbad
demanded attention, and gave them an account of his third voyage,
as follows.




                           The Third Voyage.



I soon lost in the pleasures of life the remembrance of the
perils I had encountered in my two former voyages; and being in
the flower of my age, I grew weary of living without business,
and hardening myself against the thought of any danger I might
incur, went from Bagdad to Bussorah with the richest commodities
of the country. There I embarked again with some merchants. We
made a long voyage, and touched at several ports, where we
carried on a considerable trade. One day, being out in the main
ocean, we were overtaken by a dreadful tempest, which drove us
from our course. The tempest continued several days, and brought
us before the port of an island, which the captain was very
unwilling to enter; but we were obliged to cast anchor. When we
had furled our sails, the captain told us, that this, and some
other neighbouring islands, were inhabited by hairy savages, who
would speedily attack us; and though they were but dwarfs, yet
our misfortune was such, that we must make no resistance, for
they were more in number than the locusts; and if we happened to
kill one of them, they would all fall upon us and destroy us.

This account of the captain, continued Sinbad put the whole
company into great consternation and we soon found that what he
had told us was but too true; an innumerable multitude of
frightful savages, about two feet high, covered all over with red
hair, came swimming towards us, and encompassed our ship. They
spoke to us as they came near, but we understood not their
language; they climbed up the sides of the ship with such agility
as surprised us. We beheld all this with dread, but without
daring to defend ourselves, or to divert them from their
mischievous design. In short, they took down our sails, cut the
cable, and hauling to the shore, made us all get out, and
afterwards carried the ship into another island from whence they
had come. All voyagers carefully avoided the island where they
left us, it being very dangerous to stay there, for a reason you
shall presently hear; but we were forced to bear our affliction
with patience.

We went forward into the island, where we gathered some fruits
and herbs to prolong our lives as long as we could; but we
expected nothing but death. As we advanced, we perceived at a
distance a vast pile of building, and made towards it. We found
it to be a palace, elegantly built, and very lofty, with a gate
of ebony of two leaves, which we forced open. We entered the
court, where we saw before us a large apartment, with a porch,
having on one side a heap of human bones, and on the other a vast
number of roasting spits. We trembled at this spectacle, and
being fatigued with travelling, fell to the ground, seized with
deadly apprehension, and lay a long time motionless.

The sun set, and whilst we were in the lamentable condition I
have described, the gate of the apartment opened with a loud
crash, and there came out the horrible figure of a black man, as
tall as a lofty palm-tree. He had but one eye, and that in the
middle of his forehead, where it looked as red as a burning coal.
His fore-teeth were very long and sharp, and stood out of his
mouth, which was as deep as that of a horse. His upper lip hung
down upon his breast. His ears resembled those of an elephant,
and covered his shoulders; and his nails were as long and crooked
as the talons of the greatest birds. At the sight of so frightful
a giant, we became insensible, and lay like dead men.

At last we came to ourselves, and saw him sitting in the porch
looking at us. When he had considered us well, he advanced
towards us, and laying his hand upon me, took me up by the nape
of my neck, and turned round as a butcher would do a sheep's
head. After having examined me, and perceiving me to be so lean
that I had nothing but skin and bone, he let me go. He took up
all the rest one by one, and viewed them in the same manner. The
captain being the fattest, he held him with one hand, as I would
do a sparrow, and thrust a spit through him; he then kindled a
great fire, roasted, and ate him in his apartment for his supper.
Having finished his repast, he returned to his porch, where he
lay and fell asleep, snoring louder than thunder. He slept thus
till morning. As to ourselves, it was not possible for us to
enjoy any rest, so that we passed the night in the most painful
apprehension that can be imagined. When day appeared the giant
awoke, got up, went out, and left us in the palace.

When we thought him at a distance, we broke the melancholy
silence we had preserved the whole of the night, and filled the
palace with our lamentations and groans. Though we were several
in number, and had but one enemy, it never occurred to us to
effect our deliverance by putting him to death. This enterprize
however, though difficult of execution, was the only design we
ought naturally to have formed.

We thought of several other expedients, but determined upon none;
and submitting ourselves to what it should please God to order
concerning us, we spent the day in traversing the island,
supporting ourselves with fruits and herbs as we had done the day
before. In the evening we sought for some place of shelter, but
found none; so that we were forced, whether we would or not, to
return to the palace.

The giant failed not to return, and supped once more upon one of
our companions, after which he slept, and snored till day, and
then went out and left us as before. Our situation appeared to us
so dreadful, that several of my comrades designed to throw
themselves into the sea, rather than die so painful a death; and
endeavoured to persuade the others to follow their example. Upon
which one of the company answered, "That we were forbidden to
destroy ourselves: but even if that were not the case, it was
much more reasonable to devise some method to rid ourselves of
the monster who had destined us to so horrible a fate."

Having thought of a project for this purpose, I communicated it
to my comrades, who approved it. "Brethren," said I, "you know
there is much timber floating upon the coast; if you will be
advised by me, let us make several rafts capable of bearing us,
and when they are done, leave them there till we find it
convenient to use them. In the mean time, we will carry into
execution the design I proposed to you for our deliverance from
the giant, and if it succeed, we may remain here patiently
awaiting the arrival of some ship to carry us out of this fatal
island; but if it happen to miscarry, we will take to our rafts,
and put to sea. I admit that by exposing ourselves to the fury of
the waves, we run a risk of losing our lives; but is it not
better to be buried in the sea than in the entrails of this
monster, who has already devoured two of our number?" My advice
was approved, and we made rafts capable of carrying three persons
on each.

We returned to the palace towards the evening, and the giant
arrived shortly after. We were forced to submit to seeing another
of our comrades roasted. But at last we revenged ourselves on the
brutish giant in the following manner. After he had finished his
cursed supper, he lay down on his back, and fell asleep. As soon
as we heard him snore, according to his custom, nine of the
boldest among us, and myself, took each of us a spit, and putting
the points of them into the fire till they were burning hot, we
thrust them into his eye all at once, and blinded him. The pain
made him break out into a frightful yell: he started up, and
stretched out his hands, in order to sacrifice some of us to his
rage: but we ran to such places as he could not reach; and after
having sought for us in vain, he groped for the gate, and went
out, howling in agony.

We quitted the palace after the giant, and came to the shore,
where we had left our rafts, and put them immediately to sea. We
waited till day, in order to get upon them, in case the giant
should come towards us with any guide of his own species, but we
hoped if he did not appear by sun-rising, and gave over his
howling, which we still heard, that he would prove to be dead;
and if that happened to be the case, we resolved to stay in that
island, and not to risk our lives upon the rafts: but day had
scarcely appeared, when we perceived our cruel enemy, accompanied
with two others almost of the same size, leading him; and a great
number more coming before him at a quick pace.

We did not hesitate to take to our rafts, and put to sea with all
the speed we could. The giants, who perceived this, took up great
stones, and running to the shore, entered the water up to the
middle, and threw so exactly, that they sunk all the rafts but
that I was upon; and all my companions, except the two with me,
were drowned. We rowed with all our might, and got out of the
reach of the giants. But when we got out to sea, we were exposed
to the mercy of the waves and winds, and tossed about, sometimes
on one side, and sometimes on another, and spent that night and
the following day under the most painful uncertainty as to our
fate; but next morning we had the good fortune to be thrown upon
an island, where we landed with much joy. We found excellent
fruit, which afforded us great relief, and recruited our
strength.

At night we went to sleep on the sea-shore but were awakened by
the noise of a serpent of surprising length and thickness, whose
scales made a rustling noise as he wound himself along. It
swallowed up one of my comrades, notwithstanding his loud cries,
and the efforts he made to extricate himself from it; dashing him
several times against the ground, it crushed him, and we could
hear it gnaw and tear the poor wretch's bones, though we had fled
to a considerable distance. The following day, to our great
terror, we saw the serpent again, when I exclaimed, "O heaven, to
what dangers are we exposed! We rejoiced yesterday at having
escaped from the cruelty of a giant and the rage of the waves,
now are we fallen into another danger equally dreadful."

As we walked about, we saw a large tall tree upon which we
designed to pass the following night, for our security; and
having satisfied our hunger with fruit, we mounted it according.
Shortly after, the serpent came hissing to the foot of the tree;
raised himself up against the trunk of it, and meeting with my
comrade, who sat lower than I, swallowed him at once, and went
off.

I remained upon the tree till it was day, and then came down,
more like a dead man than one alive, expecting the same fate with
my two companions. This filled me with horror, and I advanced
some steps to throw myself into the sea; but the natural love of
life prompting us to prolong it as long as we can, I withstood
this dictate of despair, and submitted myself to the will of God,
who disposes of our lives at his pleasure.

In the mean time I collected together a great quantity of small
wood, brambles, and dry thorns, and making them up into
faggots, made a wide circle with them round the tree, and also
tied some of them to the branches over my head. Having done this,
when the evening came, I shut myself up within this circle, with
the melancholy satisfaction, that I had neglected nothing which
could preserve me from the cruel destiny with which I was
threatened. The serpent failed not to come at the usual hour, and
went round the tree, seeking for an opportunity to devour me, but
was prevented by the rampart I had made; so that he lay till day,
like a cat watching in vain for a mouse that has fortunately
reached a place of safety. When day appeared, he retired, but I
dared not to leave my fort until the sun arose.

I felt so much fatigued by the labour to which it had put me, and
suffered so much from his poisonous breath, that death seemed
more eligible to me than the horrors of such a state. I came down
from the tree, and, not thinking of the resignation I had the
preceding day resolved to exercise, I ran towards the sea, with a
design to throw myself into it.

God took compassion on my hopeless state; for just as I was going
to throw myself into the sea, I perceived a ship at a
considerable distance. I called as loud as I could, and taking
the linen from my turban, displayed it, that they might observe
me. This had the desired effect; the crew perceived me, and the
captain sent his boat for me. As soon as I came on board, the
merchants and seamen flocked about me, to know how I came into
that desert island; and after I had related to them all that had
befallen me, the oldest among them said to me, they had several
times heard of the giants that dwelt in that island, that they
were cannibals, and ate men raw as well as roasted; and as to the
serpents, they added, that there were abundance in the island
that hid themselves by day, and came abroad by night. After
having testified their joy at my escaping so many dangers, they
brought me the best of their provisions; and the captain, seeing
that I was in rags, was so generous as to give me one of his own
suits. We continued at sea for some time, touched at several
islands, and at last landed at that of Salabat, where sandal wood
is obtained, which is of great use in medicine. We entered the
port, and came to anchor. The merchants began to unload their
goods, in order to sell or exchange them. In the mean time, the
captain came to me, and said, "Brother, I have here some goods
that belonged to a merchant, who sailed some time on board this
ship, and he being dead, I design to dispose of them for the
benefit of his heirs, when I find who they are." The bales he
spoke of lay on the deck, and shewing them to me, he said, "There
are the goods; I hope you will take care to sell them, and you
shall have factorage." I thanked him for thus affording me an
opportunity of employing myself, because I hated to be idle.

The clerk of the ship took an account of all the bales, with the
names of the merchants to whom they belonged. And when he asked
the captain in whose name he should enter those he had given me
the charge of; "Enter them," said the captain, "in the name of
Sinbad." I could not hear myself named without some emotion; and
looking stedfastly on the captain, I knew him to be the person
who, in my second voyage, had left me in the island where I fell
asleep, and sailed without me, or sending to see for me. But I
could not recollect him at first, he was so much altered since I
had seen him.

I was not surprised that he, believing me to be dead, did not
recognize me. "Captain," said I, "was the merchant's name, to
whom those bales belonged, Sinbad?" "Yes," replied he, "that was
his name; he came from Bagdad, and embarked on board my ship at
Bussorah. One day, when we landed at an island to take in water
and other refreshments, I knew not by what mistake, I sailed
without observing that he did not re-embark with us; neither I
nor the merchants perceived it till four hours after. We had the
wind in our stern, and so fresh a gale, that it was not then
possible for us to tack about for him." "You believe him then to
be dead?" said I. "Certainly," answered he. "No, captain," I
resumed; "look at me, and you may know that I am Sinbad, whom you
left in that desert island."

The captain, continued Sinbad, having considered me attentively,
recognized me. "God be praised," said he, embracing me; "I
rejoice that fortune has rectified my fault. There are your
goods, which I always took care to preserve." I took them from
him, and made him the acknowledgments to which he was entitled.

From the isle of Salabat, we went to another, where I furnished
myself with cloves, cinnamon, and other spices. As we sailed from
this island, we saw a tortoise twenty cubits in length and
breadth. We observed also an amphibious animal like a cow, which
gave milk; its skin is so hard, that they usually make bucklers
of it. I saw another, which had the shape and colour of a camel.

In short, after a long voyage, I arrived at Bussorah, and from
thence returned to Bagdad, with so much wealth that I knew not
its extent. I gave a great deal to the poor, and bought another
considerable estate in addition to what I had already.

Thus Sinbad finished the history of his third voyage; gave
another hundred sequins to Hindbad, invited him to dinner again
the next day, to hear the story of his fourth voyage. Hindbad and
the company retired; and on the following day, when they
returned, Sinbad after dinner continued the relation of his
adventures.




                       The Fourth Voyage.



The pleasures and amusements which I enjoyed after my third
voyage had not charms sufficient to divert me from another. My
passion for trade, and my love of novelty, again prevailed. I
therefore settled my affairs, and having provided a stock of
goods fit for the traffic I designed to engage in, I set out on
my journey. I took the route of Persia, travelled over several
provinces, and then arrived at a port, where I embarked. We
hoisted our sails, and touched at several ports of the continent,
and some of the eastern islands, and put out to sea: we were
overtaken by such a sudden gust of wind, as obliged the captain
to lower his yards, and take all other necessary precautions to
prevent the danger that threatened us. But all was in vain our
endeavours had no effect; the sails were split in a thousand
pieces, and the ship was stranded; several of the merchants and
seamen were drowned and the cargo was lost.

I had the good fortune, with several of the merchants and
mariners, to get upon some planks, and we were carried by the
current to an island which lay before us. There we found fruit
and spring water, which preserved our lives. We staid all night
near the place where we had been cast ashore, without consulting
what we should do; our misfortune had so much dispirited us that
we could not deliberate.

Next morning, as soon as the sun was up, we walked from the
shore, and advancing into the island, saw some houses, which we
approached. As soon as we drew near, we were encompassed by a
great number of negroes, who seized us, shared us among them, and
carried us to their respective habitations.

I, and five of my comrades, were carried to one place; here they
made us sit down, and gave us a certain herb, which they made
signs to us to eat. My comrades not taking notice that the blacks
ate none of it themselves, thought only of satisfying their
hunger, and ate with greediness. But I, suspecting some trick,
would not so much as taste it, which happened well for me; for in
little time after, I perceived my companions had lost their
senses, and that when they spoke to me, they knew not what they
said.

The negroes fed us afterwards with rice, prepared with oil of
cocoa-nuts; and my comrades, who had lost their reason, ate of it
greedily. I also partook of it, but very sparingly. They gave us
that herb at first on purpose to deprive us of our senses, that
we might not be aware of the sad destiny prepared for us; and
they supplied us with rice to fatten us; for, being cannibals,
their design was to eat us as soon as we grew fat. This
accordingly happened, for they devoured my comrades, who were not
sensible of their condition; but my senses being entire, you may
easily guess that instead of growing fat, as the rest did, I grew
leaner every day. The fear of death under which I laboured,
turned all my food into poison. I fell into a languishing
distemper, which proved my safety; for the negroes, having killed
and eaten my companions, seeing me to be withered, lean, and
sick, deferred my death.

Meanwhile I had much liberty, so that scarcely any notice was taken of
what I did, and this gave me an opportunity one day to get at a
distance from the houses, and to make my escape. An old man, who saw
me, and suspected my design, called to me as loud as he could to
return; but instead of obeying him, I redoubled my speed, and quickly
got out of sight. At that time there was none but the old man about
the houses, the rest being abroad, and not to return till night, which
was usual with them. Therefore, being sure that they could not arrive
time enough to pursue me, I went on till night, when I stopped to rest
a little, and to eat some of the provisions I had secured; but I
speedily set forward again, and travelled seven days, avoiding those
places which seemed to be inhabited, and lived for the most part upon
cocoa-nuts, which served me both for meat and drink. On the eighth day
I came near the sea, and saw some white people like myself, gathering
pepper, of which there was great plenty in that place. This I took to
be a good omen, and went to them without any scruple.

The people who gathered pepper came to meet me as soon as they
saw me, and asked me in Arabic who I was, and whence I came? I
was overjoyed to hear them speak in my own language, and
satisfied their curiosity, by giving them an account of my
shipwreck, and how I fell into the hands of the negroes. "Those
negroes," replied they, "eat men, and by what miracle did you
escape their cruelty?" I related to them the circumstances I have
just mentioned, at which they were wonderfully surprised.

I staid with them till they had gathered their quantity of
pepper, and then sailed with them to the island from whence they
had come. They presented me to their king, who was a good prince.
He had the patience to hear the relation of my adventures, which
surprised him; and he afterwards gave me clothes, and commanded
care to be taken of me.

The island was very well peopled, plentiful in everything, and
the capital a place of great trade. This agreeable retreat was
very comfortable to me after my misfortunes, and the kindness of
this generous prince completed my satisfaction. In a word, there
was not a person more in favour with him than myself; and,
consequently, every man in court and city sought to oblige me; so
that in a very little time I was looked upon rather as a native
than a stranger.

I observed one thing, which to me appeared very extraordinary.
All the people, the king himself not excepted, rode their horses
without saddle, bridle, or stirrups. This made me one day take
the liberty to ask the king how it came to pass? His majesty
answered, that I talked to him of things which nobody knew the
use of in his dominions.

I went immediately to a workman, and gave him a model for making
the stock of a saddle. When that was done, I covered it myself
with velvet and leather, and embroidered it with gold. I
afterwards went to a smith, who made me a bit, according to the
pattern I shewed him, and also some stirrups. When I had all
things completed, I presented them to the king, and put them upon
one of his horses. His majesty mounted immediately, and was so
pleased with them, that he testified his satisfaction by large
presents. I could not avoid making several others for the
ministers and principal officers of his household, who all of
them made me presents that enriched me in a little time. I also
made some for the people of best quality in the city, which
gained me great reputation and regard.

As I paid my court very constantly to the king, he said to me one
day, "Sinbad, I love thee; and all my subjects who know thee,
treat thee according to my example. I have one thing to demand of
thee, which thou must grant." "Sir," answered I, "there is
nothing but I will do, as a mark of my obedience to your majesty,
whose power over me is absolute." "I have a mind thou shouldst
marry," replied he, "that so thou mayst stay in my dominions, and
think no more of thy own country." I durst not resist the
prince's will, and he gave me one of the ladies of his court,
noble, beautiful, and rich. The ceremonies of marriage being
over, I went and dwelt with my wife, and for some time we lived
together in perfect harmony. I was not, however, satisfied with
my banishment, therefore designed to make my escape the first
opportunity, and to return to Bagdad; which my present
settlement, how advantageous soever, could not make me forget.

At this time the wife of one of my neighbours, with whom I had
contrasted a very strict friendship, fell sick, and died. I went
to see and comfort him in his affliction, and finding him
absorbed in sorrow, I said to him as soon as I saw him, "God
preserve you and grant you a long life." "Alas!" replied he, "how
do you think I should obtain the favour you wish me? I have not
above an hour to live." "Pray," said I, "do not entertain such a
melancholy thought; I hope I shall enjoy your company many
years." "I wish you," he replied, "a long life; but my days are
at an end, for I must be buried this day with my wife. This is a
law which our ancestors established in this island, and it is
always observed inviolably. The living husband is interred with
the dead wife, and the living wife with the dead husband. Nothing
can save me; every one must submit to this law."

While he was giving me an account of this barbarous custom, the very
relation of which chilled my blood, his kindred, friends, and
neighbours, came in a body to assist at the funeral. They dressed the
corpse of the woman in her richest apparel, and all her jewels, as if
it had been her wedding-day; then they placed her on an open coffin,
and began their march to the place of burial. The husband walked at
the head of the company, and followed the corpse. They proceeded to a
high mountain, and when they had reached the place of their
destination, they took up a large stone, which covered the mouth of a
deep pit, and let down the corpse with all its apparel and jewels.
Then the husband, embracing his kindred and friends, suffered himself
to be put into another open coffin without resistance, with a pot of
water, and seven small loaves, and was let down in the same manner.
The mountain was of considerable length, and extended along the
sea-shore, and the pit was very deep. The ceremony being over, the
aperture was again covered with the stone, and the company returned.

It is needless for me to tell you that I was a most melancholy
spectator this funeral, while the rest were scarcely moved, the
custom was to them so familiar. I could not forbear communicating
to the king my sentiment respecting the practice: "Sir," I said,
"I cannot but feel astonished at the strange usage observed in
this country, of burying the living with the dead. I have been a
great traveller, and seen many countries, but never heard of so
cruel a law." "What do you mean, Sinbad?" replied the king: "it
is a common law. I shall be interred with the queen, my wife, if
she die first." "But, Sir," said I, "may I presume to ask your
majesty, if strangers be obliged to observe this law?" "Without
doubt," returned the king (smiling at the occasion of my
question), "they are not exempted, if they be married in this
island."

I returned home much depressed by this answer; for the fear of my
wife's dying first, and that I should be interred alive with her,
occasioned me very uneasy reflections. But there was no remedy; I
must have patience, and submit to the will of God. I trembled
however at every little indisposition of my wife. Alas! in a
little time my fears were realized, for she fell sick, and died.

Judge of my sorrow; to be interred alive, seemed to me as
deplorable a termination of life as to be devoured by cannibals.
It was necessary, however, to submit. The king and all his court
expressed their wish to honour the funeral with their presence,
and the most considerable people of the city did the same. When
all was ready for the ceremony, the corpse was put into a coffin,
with all her jewels and her most magnificent apparel. The
procession began, and as second actor in this doleful tragedy, I
went next the corpse, with my eyes full of tears, bewailing my
deplorable fate. Before we reached the mountain, I made an
attempt to affect the minds of the spectators: I addressed myself
to the king first, and then to all those that were round me;
bowing before them to the earth, and kissing the border of their
garments, I prayed them to have compassion upon me. "Consider,"
said I, "that I am a stranger, and ought not to be subject to
this rigorous law, and that I have another wife and children in
my own country." Although I spoke in the most pathetic manner, no
one was moved by my address; on the contrary, they ridiculed my
dread of death as cowardly, made haste to let my wife's corpse
into the pit, and lowered me down the next moment in an open
coffin, with full of water and seven loaves. In short, the fatal
ceremony being performed, they covered over the mouth of the pit,
notwithstanding my grief and piteous lamentations.

As I approached the bottom, I discovered by the aid of the little
light that came from above the nature of this subterranean place,
it seemed an endless cavern, and might be about fifty fathom
deep. I was annoyed by an insufferable stench proceeding from the
multitude of bodies which I saw on the right and left; nay, I
fancied that I heard some of them sigh out their last. However,
when I got down, I immediately left my coffin, and getting at a
distance from the bodies, held my nose, and lay down upon the
ground, where I stayed a considerable time, bathed in tears. At
last, reflecting on my melancholy case, "It is true," said I,
"that God disposes all things according to the degrees of his
providence; but, unhappy Sinbad, hast thou any but thyself to
blame that thou art brought to die so strange a death? Would to
God thou hadst perished in some of those tempests which thou hast
escaped! then thy death had not been so lingering, and so
terrible in all its circumstances. But thou hast drawn all this
upon thyself by thy inordinate avarice. Ah, unfortunate wretch!
shouldst thou not rather have remained at home, and quietly
enjoyed the fruits of thy labour?"

Such were the vain complaints with which I filled the cave,
beating my head and breast out of rage and despair, and
abandoning myself to the most afflicting thoughts. Nevertheless,
I must tell you, that instead of calling death to my assistance
in that miserable condition, I felt still an inclination to live,
and to do all I could to prolong my days. I went groping about,
with my nose stopped, for the bread and water that was in my
coffin, and took some of it. Though the darkness of the cave was
so great that I could not distinguish day and night, yet I always
found my coffin again, and the cave seemed to be more spacious
and fuller of bodies than it had appeared to be at first. I lived
for some days upon my bread and water, which being all spent, I
at last prepared for death.

As I was thinking of death, I heard the stone lifted up from the
mouth of the cave, and immediately the corpse of a man was let
down When reduced to necessity, it is natural to come to extreme
resolutions. While they let down the woman I approached the place
where her coffin was to be put, and as soon as I perceived they
were again covering the mouth of the cave, gave the unfortunate
wretch two or three violent blows over the head, with a large
bone; which stunned, or, to say the truth, killed her. I
committed this inhuman action merely for the sake of the bread
and water that was in her coffin, and thus I had provision for
some days more. When that was spent, they letdown another dead
woman, and a living man; I killed the man in the same manner,
and, as there was then a sort of mortality in the town, by
continuing this practice I did not want for provisions.

One day after I had dispatched another woman, I heard something
tread, and breathing or panting as it walked. I advanced towards
that side from whence I heard the noise, and on my approach the
creature puffed and blew harder, as if running away from me. I
followed the noise, and the thing seemed to stop sometimes, but
always fled and blew as I approached. I pursued it for a
considerable time, till at last I perceived a light, resembling a
star; I went on, sometimes lost sight of it, but always found it
again, and at last discovered that it came through a hole in the
rock, large enough to admit a man.

Upon this, I stopped some time to rest, being much fatigued with
the rapidity of my progress: afterwards coming up to the hole, I
got through, and found myself upon the sea shore. I leave you to
guess the excess of my joy: it was such, that I could scarcely
persuade myself that the whole was not a dream.

But when I was recovered from my surprise, and convinced of the
reality of my escape, I perceived what I had followed to be a
creature which came out of the sea, and was accustomed to enter
the cavern and feed upon the bodies of the dead.

I examined the mountain, and found it to be situated betwixt the
sea and the town, but without any passage to or communication
with the latter; the rocks on the sea side being high and
perpendicularly steep. I prostrated myself on the shore to thank
God for this mercy, and afterwards entered the cave again to
fetch bread and water, which I ate by daylight with a better
appetite than I had done since my interment in the dark cavern.

I returned thither a second time, and groped among the coffins
for all the diamonds, rubies, pearls, gold bracelets, and rich
stuffs I could find; these I brought to the shore, and tying them
up neatly into bales, with the cords that let down the coffins, I
laid them together upon the beach, waiting till some ship might
appear, without fear of rain, for it was then the dry season.

After two or three days, I perceived a ship just come out of the
harbour, making for the place where I was. I made a sign with the
linen of my turban, and called to the crew as loud as I could.
They heard me, and sent a boat to bring me on board, when they
asked by what misfortune I came thither; I told them that I had
suffered shipwreck two days before, and made shift to get ashore
with the goods they saw. It was fortunate for me that these
people did not consider the place where I was, nor enquire into
the probability of what I told them; but without hesitation took
me on board with my goods. When I came to the ship, the captain
was so well pleased to have saved me, and so much taken up with
his own affairs, that he also took the story of my pretended
shipwreck upon trust, and generously refused some jewels which I
offered him.

We passed by several islands, and among others that called the
isle of Bells, about ten days' sail from Serendib, with a regular
wind, and six from that of Kela, where we landed. This island
produces lead mines, Indian canes, and excellent camphire.

The king of the isle of Kela is very rich and powerful, and the
isle of Bells, which is about two days journey in extent, is also
subject to him. The inhabitants are so barbarous that they still
eat human flesh. After we had finished our traffic in that
island, we put to sea again, and touched at several other ports;
at last I arrived happily at Bagdad with infinite riches, of
which it is needless to trouble you with the detail. Out of
gratitude to God for his mercies, I contributed liberally towards
the support of several mosques, and the subsistence of the poor,
gave myself up to the society of my kindred and friends, enjoying
myself with them in festivities and amusements.

Here Sinbad finished the relation of his fourth voyage, which
appeared more surprising to the company than the three former. He
made a new present of one hundred sequins to Hindbad, whom he
requested to return with the rest next day at the same hour to
dine with him, and hear the story of his fifth voyage. Hindbad
and the other guests took their leave and retired. Next morning
when they all met, they sat down at table, and when dinner was
over, Sinbad began the relation of his fifth voyage as follows.




                       The Fifth Voyage.



The pleasures I enjoyed had again charms enough to make me forget
all the troubles and calamities I had undergone, but could not
cure me of my inclination to make new voyages. I therefore bought
goods, departed with them for the best sea-port; and there, that
I might not be obliged to depend upon a captain, but have a ship
at my own command, I remained till one was built on purpose, at
my own charge. When the ship was ready, I went on board with my
goods; but not having enough to load her, I agreed to take with
me several merchants of different nations with their merchandize.

We sailed with the first fair wind, and after a long navigation
the first place we touched at was a desert island, where we found
an egg of a roe, equal in size to that I formerly mentioned.
There was a young roc it just ready to be hatched, and its bill
had begun to appear.

The merchants whom I had taken on board, and who landed with me,
broke the egg with hatchets, and made a hole in it, pulled out
the young roc piecemeal, and roasted it. I had earnestly
intreated them not to meddle with the egg, but they would not
listen to me.

Scarcely had they finished their repast, when there appeared in
the air at a considerable distance from us two great clouds. The
captain whom I had hired to navigate my ship, knowing by
experience what they meant, said they were the male and female
roc that belonged to the young one, and pressed us to re-embark
with all speed, to prevent the misfortune which he saw would
otherwise befall us. We hastened on board, and set sail with all
possible expedition.

In the mean time, the two roes approached with a frightful noise,
which they redoubled when they saw the egg broken, and their
young one gone. They flew back in the direction they had come,
and disappeared for some time, while we made all the sail we
could to endeavour to prevent that which unhappily befell us.

They soon returned, and we observed that each of them carried between
its talons stones, or rather rocks, of a monstrous size. When they
came directly over my ship, they hovered, and one of them let fall a
stone, but by the dexterity of the steersman it missed us, and falling
into the sea, divided the water so that we could almost see the
bottom. The other roe, to our misfortune, threw his messy burden so
exactly upon the middle of the ship, as to split it into a thousand
pieces. The mariners and passengers were all crushed to death, or
sunk. I myself was of the number of the latter; but as I came up
again, I fortunately caught hold of a piece of the wreck, and swimming
sometimes with one hand, and sometimes with the other, but always
holding fast my board, the wind and the tide favouring me, I came to
an island, whose shore was very steep. I overcame that difficulty,
however, and got ashore.

I sat down upon the grass, to recover myself from my fatigue,
after which I went into the island to explore it. It seemed to be
a delicious garden. I found trees everywhere, some of them
bearing green, and others ripe fruits, and streams of fresh pure
water running in pleasant meanders. I ate of the fruits, which I
found excellent; and drank of the water, which was very light and
good.

When night closed in, I lay down upon the grass in a convenient
spot, but could not sleep an hour at a time, my mind being
apprehensive of danger. I spent best part of the night in alarm,
and reproached myself for my imprudence in not remaining at home,
rather than undertaking this last voyage. These reflections
carried me so far, that I began to form a design against my life;
but daylight dispersed these melancholy thoughts. I got up, and
walked among the trees, but not without some fears.

When I was a little advanced into the island, I saw an old man,
who appeared very weak and infirm. He was sitting on the bank of
a stream, and at first I took him to be one who had been
shipwrecked like myself. I went towards him and saluted him, but
he only slightly bowed his head. I asked him why he sat so still,
but instead of answering me, he made a sign for me to take him
upon my back, and carry him over the brook, signifying that it
was to gather fruit.

I believed him really to stand in need of my assistance, took him
upon my back, and having carried him over, bade him get down, and
for that end stooped, that he might get off with ease; but
instead of doing so (which I laugh at every time I think of it)
the old man, who to me appeared quite decrepit, clasped his legs
nimbly about my neck, when I perceived his skin to resemble that
of a cow. He sat astride upon my shoulders, and held my throat so
tight, that I thought he would have strangled me, the
apprehension of which make me swoon and fall down.

Notwithstanding my fainting, the ill-natured old fellow kept fast
about my neck, but opened his legs a little to give me time to
recover my breath. When I had done so, he thrust one of his feet
against my stomach, and struck me so rudely on the side with the
other, that he forced me to rise up against my will. Having
arisen, he made me walk under the trees, and forced me now and
then to stop, to gather and eat fruit such as we found. He never
left me all day, and when I lay down to rest at night, laid
himself down with me, holding always fast about my neck. Every
morning he pushed me to make me awake, and afterwards obliged me
to get up and walk, and pressed me with his feet. You may judge
then, gentlemen, what trouble I was in, to be loaded with such a
burden of which I could not get rid.

One day I found in my way several dry calebashes that had fallen
from a tree. I took a large one, and after cleaning it, pressed
into it some juice of grapes, which abounded in the island;
having filled the calebash, I put it by in a convenient place,
and going thither again some days after, I tasted it, and found
the wine so good, that it soon made me forget my sorrow, gave me
new vigour, and so exhilarated my spirits, that I began to sing
and dance as I walked along.

The old man, perceiving the effect which this liquor had upon me,
and that I carried him with more ease than before, made me a sign
to give him some of it. I handed him the calebash, and the liquor
pleasing his palate, he drank it all off. There being a
considerable quantity of it, he became drunk immediately, and the
fumes getting up into his head, he began to sing after his
manner, and to dance with his breech upon my shoulders. His
jolting made him vomit, and he loosened his legs from about me by
degrees. Finding that he did not press me as before, I threw him
upon the ground, where he lay without motion; I then took up a
great stone, and crushed his head to pieces.

I was extremely glad to be thus freed for ever from this
troublesome fellow. I now walked towards the beach, where I met
the crew of a ship that had cast anchor, to take in water. They
were surprised to see me, but more so at hearing the particulars
of my adventures. "You fell," said they, "into the hands of the
old man of the sea, and are the first who ever escaped strangling
by his malicious tricks. He never quitted those he had once made
himself master of, till he had destroyed them, and he has made
this island notorious by the number of men he has slain; so that
the merchants and mariners who landed upon it, durst not advance
into the island but in numbers at a time."

After having informed me of these things, they carried me with
them to the ship; the captain received me with great kindness,
when they told him what had befallen me. He put out again to sea,
and after some days' sail, we arrived at the harbour of a great
city, the houses of which were built with hewn stone.

One of the merchants who had taken me into his friendship invited
me to go along with him, and carried me to a place appointed for
the accommodation of foreign merchants. He gave me a large bag,
and having recommended me to some people of the town, who used to
gather cocoa-nuts, desired them to take me with them. "Go," said
he, "follow them, and act as you see them do, but do not separate
from them, otherwise you may endanger your life." Having thus
spoken, he gave me provisions for the journey, and I went with
them.

We came to a thick forest of cocoa-trees, very lofty, with trunks
so smooth that it was not possible to climb to the branches that
bore the fruit. When we entered the forest we saw a great number
of apes of several sizes, who fled as soon as they perceived us,
and climbed up to the top of the trees with surprising swiftness.

The merchants with whom I was, gathered stones and threw them at
the apes on the trees. I did the same, and the apes out of
revenge threw cocoa-nuts at us so fast, and with such gestures,
as sufficiently testified their anger and resentment. We gathered
up the cocoa-nuts, and from time to time threw stones to provoke
the apes; so that by this stratagem we filled our bags with
cocoa-nuts, which it had been impossible otherwise to have done.

When we had gathered our number, we returned to the city, where
the merchant, who had sent me to the forest, gave me the value of
the cocoas I brought: "Go on," said he, "and do the like every
day, until you have got money enough to carry you home." I
thanked him for his advice, and gradually collected as many
cocoa-nuts as produced me a considerable sum.

The vessel in which I had come sailed with some merchants, who
loaded her with cocoa-nuts. I expected the arrival of another,
which anchored soon after for the like loading. I embarked in her
all the cocoa-nuts I had, and when she was ready to sail, took
leave of the merchant who had been so kind to me; but he could
not embark with me, because he had not finished his business at
the port.

We sailed towards the islands, where pepper grows in great
plenty. From thence we went to the isle of Comari, where the best
species of wood of aloes grows, and whose inhabitants have made
it an inviolable law to themselves to drink no wine, and suffer
no place of debauch. I exchanged my cocoa in those two islands
for pepper and wood of aloes, and went with other merchants a
pearl-fishing. I hired divers, who brought me up some that were
very large and pure. I embarked in a vessel that happily arrived
at Bussorah; from thence I returned to Bagdad, where I made vast
sums of my pepper, wood of aloes, and pearls. I gave the tenth of
my gains in alms, as I had done upon my return from my other
voyages, and endeavoured to dissipate my fatigues by amusements
of different kinds.

When Sinbad had finished his story, he ordered one hundred
sequins to be given to Hindbad, who retired with the other
guests; but next morning the same company returned to dine with
rich Sinbad; who, after having treated them as formerly,
requested their attention, and gave the following account of his
sixth voyage.




                       The Sixth Voyage.



Gentlemen, you long without doubt to know, how, after having been
shipwrecked five times, and escaped so many dangers, I could
resolve again to tempt fortune, and expose myself to new
hardships? I am, myself, astonished at my conduct when I reflect
upon it, and must certainly have been actuated by my destiny. But
be that as it may, after a year's rest I prepared for a sixth
voyage, notwithstanding the intreaties of my kindred and friends,
who did all in their power to dissuade me.

Instead of taking my way by the Persian gulf, I travelled once
more through several provinces of Persia and the Indies, and
arrived at a sea-port, where I embarked in a ship, the captain of
which was bound on a long voyage. It was long indeed, and at the
same time so unfortunate, that the captain and pilot lost their
course. They however at last discovered where they were, but we
had no reason to rejoice at the circumstance. Suddenly we saw the
captain quit his post, uttering loud lamentations. He threw off
his turban, pulled his beard, and beat his head like a madman. We
asked him the reason, and he answered, that he was in the most
dangerous place in all the ocean. "A rapid current carries the
ship along with it, and we shall all perish in less than a
quarter of an hour. Pray to God to deliver us from this peril; we
cannot escape, if he do not take pity on us." At these words he
ordered the sails to be lowered; but all the ropes broke, and the
ship was carried by the current to the foot of an inaccessible
mountain, where she struck and went to pieces, yet in such a
manner that we saved our lives, our provisions, and the best of
our goods.

This being over, the captain said to us, "God has done what
pleased him. Each of us may dig his grave, and bid the world
adieu; for we are all in so fatal a place, that none shipwrecked
here ever returned to their homes." His discourse afflicted us
sensibly, and we embraced each other, bewailing our deplorable
lot.

The mountain at the foot of which we were wrecked formed part of
the coast of a very large island. It was covered with wrecks, and
from the vast number of human bones we saw everywhere, and which
filled us with horror, we concluded that multitudes of people had
perished there. It is also incredible what a quantity of goods
and riches we found cast ashore. All these objects served only to
augment our despair. In all other places, rivers run from their
channels into the sea, but here a river of fresh water runs out
of the sea into a dark cavern, whose entrance is very high and
spacious. What is most remarkable in this place is, that the
stones of the mountain are of crystal, rubies, or other precious
stones. Here is also a sort of fountain of pitch or bitumen, that
runs into the sea, which the fish swallow, and evacuate soon
afterwards, turned into ambergris: and this the waves throw up on
the beach in great quantities. Trees also grow here, most of
which are wood of aloes, equal in goodness to those of Comari.

To finish the description of this place, which may well be called
a gulf, since nothing ever returns from it, it is not possible
for ships to get off when once they approach within a certain
distance. If they be driven thither by a wind from the sea, the
wind and the current impel them; and if they come into it when a
land-wind blows, which might seem to favour their getting out
again, the height of the mountain stops the wind, and occasions a
calm, so that the force of the current carries them ashore: and
what completes the misfortune is, that there is no possibility of
ascending the mountain, or of escaping by sea.

We continued upon the shore in a state of despair, and expected
death every day. At first we divided our provisions as equally as
we could, and thus every one lived a longer or shorter time,
according to his temperance, and the use he made of his
provisions.

Those who died first were interred by the survivors, and I paid
the last duty to all my companions: nor are you to wonder at
this; for besides that I husbanded the provision that fell to my
share better than they, I had some of my own which I did not
share with my comrades; yet when I buried the last, I had so
little remaining, that I thought I could not long survive: I dug
a grave, resolving to lie down in it, because there was no one
left to inter me. I must confess to you at the same time, that
while I was thus employed, I could not but reproach myself as the
cause of my own ruin, and repented that I had ever undertaken
this last voyage. Nor did I stop at reflections only, but had
well nigh hastened my own death, and began to tear my hands with
my teeth.

But it pleased God once more to take compassion on me, and put it
in my mind to go to the bank of the river which ran into the
great cavern. Considering its probable course with great
attention, I said to myself, "This river, which runs thus under
ground, must somewhere have an issue. If I make a raft, and leave
myself to the current, it will convey me to some inhabited
country, or I shall perish. If I be drowned, I lose nothing, but
only change one kind of death for another; and if I get out of
this fatal place, I shall not only avoid the sad fate of my
comrades, but perhaps find some new occasion of enriching myself.
Who knows but fortune waits, upon my getting off this dangerous
shelf, to compensate my shipwreck with usury."

I immediately went to work upon large pieces of timber and
cables, for I had choice of them, and tied them together so
strongly, that I soon made a very solid raft. When I had
finished, I loaded it with some bulses of rubies, emeralds,
ambergris, rock-crystal, and bales of rich stuffs. Having
balanced my cargo exactly, and fastened it well to the raft, I
went on board with two oars that I had made, and leaving it to
the course of the river, resigned myself to the will of God.

As soon as I entered the cavern, I lost all light, and the stream
carried me I knew not whither. Thus I floated some days in
perfect darkness, and once found the arch so low, that it very
nearly touched my head, which made me cautious afterwards to
avoid the like danger. All this while I ate nothing but what was
just necessary to support nature; yet, notwithstanding my
frugality, all my provisions were spent. Then a pleasing stupor
seized upon me. I cannot tell how long it continued; but when I
revived, I was surprised to find myself in an extensive plain on
the brink of a river, where my raft was tied, amidst a great
number of negroes. I got up as soon as I saw them, and saluted
them. They spoke to me, but I did not understand their language.
I was so transported with joy, that I knew not whether I was
asleep or awake; but being persuaded that I was not asleep, I
recited the following words in Arabic aloud: "Call upon the
Almighty, he will help thee; thou needest not perplex thyself
about any thing else: shut thy eyes, and while thou art asleep,
God will change thy bad fortune into good."

One of the blacks, who understood Arabic, hearing me speak thus,
came towards me, and said, "Brother, be not surprised to see us,
we are inhabitants of this country, and came hither to-day to
water our fields, by digging little canals from this river, which
comes out of the neighbouring mountain. We observed something
floating upon the water, went to see what it was, and, perceiving
your raft, one of us swam into the river, and brought it thither,
where we fastened it, as you see, until you should awake. Pray
tell us your history, for it must be extraordinary; how did you
venture yourself into this river, and whence did you come?" "I
begged of them first to give me something to eat, and then I
would satisfy their curiosity. They gave me several sorts of
food, and when I had satisfied my hunger, I related all that had
befallen me, which they listened to with attentive surprise. As
soon as I had finished, they told me, by the person who spoke
Arabic and interpreted to them what I said, that it was one of
the most wonderful stories they had ever heard, and that I must
go along with them, and tell it their king myself; it being too
extraordinary to be related by any other than the person to whom
the events had happened. I assured them that I was ready to do
whatever they pleased."

They immediately sent for a horse, which was brought in a little
time; and having helped me to mount, some of them walked before
to shew the way, while the rest took my raft and cargo and
followed.

We marched till we came to the capital of Serendib, for it was in
that island I had landed. The blacks presented me to their king;
I approached his throne, and saluted him as I used to do the
kings of the Indies; that is to say, I prostrated myself at his
feet. The prince ordered me to rise, received me with an obliging
air, and made me sit down near him. He first asked me my name,
and I answered, "People call me Sinbad the voyager, because of
the many voyages I have undertaken, and I am a citizen of
Bagdad." "But," resumed he, "how came you into my dominions, and
from whence came you last?"

I concealed nothing from the king; I related to him all that I
have told you, and his majesty was so surprised and pleased, that
he commanded my adventures to be written in letters of gold, and
laid up in the archives of his kingdom. At last my raft was
brought in, and the bales opened in his presence; he admired the
quantity of wood of aloes and ambergris, but, above all, the
rubies and emeralds, for he had none in his treasury that
equalled them.

Observing that he looked on my jewels with pleasure, and viewed
the most remarkable among them one after another, I fell
prostrate at his feet, and took the liberty to say to him, "Sir,
not only my person is at your majesty's service, but the cargo of
the raft, and I would beg of you to dispose of it as your own."
He answered me with a smile, "Sinbad, I will take care not to
covet any thing of yours, or to take any thing from you that God
has given you; far from lessening your wealth, I design to
augment it, and will not let you quit my dominions without marks
of my liberality." All the answer I returned were prayers for the
prosperity of that nobly minded prince, and commendations of his
generosity and bounty. He charged one of his officers to take
care of me, and ordered people to serve me at his own expence.
The officer was very faithful in the execution of his commission,
and caused all the goods to be carried to the lodgings provided
for me.

I went every day at a set hour to make my court to the king, and
spent the rest of my time in viewing the city, and what was most
worthy of notice.

The isle of Serendib is situated just under the equinoctial line;
so that the days and nights there are always of twelve hours
each, and the island is eighty parasangs in length, and as many
in breadth.

The capital stands at the end of a fine valley, in the middle of
the island, encompassed by mountains the highest in the world.
They are seen three days' sail off at sea. Rubies and several
sorts of minerals abound, and the rocks are for the most part
composed of a metalline stone made use of to cut and polish other
precious stones. All kinds of rare plants and trees grow there,
especially cedars and cocoa-nut. There is also a pearl-fishing in
the mouth of its principal river; and in some of its valleys are
found diamonds. I made, by way of devotion, a pilgrimage to the
place where Adam was confined after his banishment from Paradise,
and had the curiosity to go to the top of the mountain.

When I returned to the city, I prayed the king to allow me to
return to my own country, and he granted me permission in the
most obliging and most honourable manner. He would needs force a
rich present upon me; and when I went to take my leave of him, he
gave me one much more considerable, and at the same time charged
me with a letter for the commander of the faithful, our
sovereign, saying to me, "I pray you give this present from me,
and this letter to the caliph, and assure him of my friendship."
I took the present and letter in a very respectful manner, and
promised his majesty punctually to execute the commission with
which he was pleased to honour me. Before I embarked, this prince
sent for the captain and the merchants who were to go with me,
and ordered them to treat me with all possible respect.

The letter from the king of Serendib was written on the skin of a
certain animal of great value, because of its being so scarce,
and of a yellowish colour. The characters of this letter were of
azure, and the contents as follows:

"The king of the Indies, before whom march one hundred elephants,
who lives in a palace that shines with one hundred thousand
rubies, and who has in his treasury twenty thousand crowns
enriched with diamonds, to caliph Haroon al Rusheed.

"Though the present we send you be inconsiderable, receive it
however as a brother and a friend, in consideration of the hearty
friendship which we bear for you, and of which we are willing to
give you proof. We desire the same part in your friendship,
considering that we believe it to be our merit, being of the same
dignity with yourself. We conjure you this in quality of a
brother. Adieu."

The present consisted first, of one single ruby made into a cup,
about half a foot high, an inch thick, and filled with round
pearls of half a drachm each. 2. The skin of a serpent, whose
scales were as large as an ordinary piece of gold, and had the
virtue to preserve from sickness those who lay upon it. 3. Fifty
thousand drachms of the best wood of aloes, with thirty grains of
camphire as big as pistachios. 4. A female slave of ravishing
beauty, whose apparel was all covered over with jewels.

The ship set sail, and after a very successful navigation we
landed at Bussorah, and from thence I went to Bagdad, where the
first thing I did was to acquit myself of my commission.

Scheherazade stopped, because day appeared, and next night
proceeded thus.

I took the king of Serendib's letter, and went to present myself
at the gate of the commander of the faithful, followed by the
beautiful slave, and such of my own family as carried the
presents. I stated the reason of my coming, and was immediately
conducted to the throne of the caliph. I made my reverence, and,
after a short speech, gave him the letter and present. When he
had read what the king of Serendib wrote to him, he asked me, if
that prince were really so rich and potent as he represented
himself in his letter? I prostrated myself a second time, and
rising again, said, "Commander of the faithful, I can assure your
majesty he doth not exceed the truth. I bear him witness. Nothing
is more worthy of admiration than the magnificence of his palace.
When the prince appears in public, he has a throne fixed on the
back of an elephant, and marches betwixt two ranks of his
ministers, favourites, and other people of his court; before him,
upon the same elephant, an officer carries a golden lance in his
hand; and behind the throne there is another, who stands upright,
with a column of gold, on the top of which is an emerald half a
foot long, and an inch thick; before him march a guard of one
thousand men, clad in cloth of gold and silk, and mounted on
elephants richly caparisoned.

"While the king is on his march, the officer, who is before him on the
same elephant, cries from time to time, with a loud voice, 'Behold the
great monarch, the potent and redoubtable sultan of the Indies, whose
palace is covered with one hundred thousand rubies, and who possesses
twenty thousand crowns of diamonds. Behold the monarch greater than
Solomon, and the powerful Maha-raja.' After he has pronounced those
words, the officer behind the throne cries in his turn, 'This monarch,
so great and so powerful, must die, must die, must die.' And the
officer before replies, 'Praise be to him who lives for ever.'

"Farther, the king of Serendib is so just, that there are no
judges in his dominions. His people have no need of them. They
understand and observe justice rigidly of themselves."

The caliph was much pleased with my account. "The wisdom of that
king," said he, "appears in his letter, and after what you tell
me, I must confess, that his wisdom is worthy of his people, and
his people deserve so wise a prince." Having spoken thus, he
dismissed me, and sent me home with a rich present.

Sinbad left off, and his company retired, Hindbad having first
received one hundred sequins; and next day they returned to hear
the relation of his seventh and last voyage.




                  The Seventh and Last Voyage.



Being returned from my sixth voyage, said Sinbad, I absolutely
laid aside all thoughts of travelling; for, besides that my age
now required rest, I was resolved no more to expose myself to
such risks as I had encountered; so that I thought of nothing but
to pass the rest of my days in tranquillity. One day as I was
treating my friends, one of my servants came and told me that an
officer of the caliph's enquired for me. I rose from table, and
went to him. "The caliph," he said, "has sent me to tell you,
that he must speak with you." I followed the officer to the
palace, where being presented to the caliph, I saluted him by
prostrating myself at his feet. "Sinbad," said he to me, "I stand
in need of your service; you must carry my answer and present to
the king of Serendib. It is but just I should return his
civility."

This command of the caliph was to me like a clap of thunder.
"Commander of the faithful," I replied, "I am ready to do
whatever your majesty shall think fit to command; but I beseech
you most humbly to consider what I have undergone. I have also
made a vow never to go out of Bagdad." Hence I took occasion to
give him a full and particular account of all my adventures,
which he had the patience to hear out.

As soon as I had finished, "I confess," said he, "that the things
you tell me are very extraordinary, yet you must for my sake
undertake this voyage which I propose to you. You will only have
to go to the isle of Serendib, and deliver the commission which I
give you. After that you are at liberty to return. But you must
go; for you know it would not comport with my dignity, to be
indebted to the king of that island." Perceiving that the caliph
insisted upon my compliance, I submitted, and told him that I was
willing to obey. He was very well pleased, and ordered me one
thousand sequins for the expences of my journey.

I prepared for my departure in a few days, and as soon as the
caliph's letter and present were delivered to me, I went to
Bussorah, where I embarked, and had a very happy voyage. Having
arrived at the isle of Serendib, I acquainted the king's
ministers with my commission, and prayed them to get me speedy
audience. They did so, and I was conducted to the palace in an
honourable manner, where I saluted the king by prostration,
according to custom. That prince knew me immediately, and
testified very great joy at seeing me. "Sinbad," said he, "you
are welcome; I have many times thought of you since you departed;
I bless the day on which we see one another once more." I made my
compliment to him, and after having thanked him for his kindness,
delivered the caliph's letter and present, which he received with
all imaginable satisfaction.

The caliph's present was a complete suit of cloth of gold, valued
at one thousand sequins; fifty robes of rich stuff, a hundred of
white cloth, the finest of Cairo, Suez, and Alexandria; a vessel
of agate broader than deep, an inch thick, and half a foot wide,
the bottom of which represented in bass relief a man with one
knee on the ground, who held bow and an arrow, ready to discharge
at a lion. He sent him also a rich tablet, which, according to
tradition, belonged to the great Solomon. The caliph's letter was
as follows:

"Greeting, in the name of the sovereign guide of the right way,
from the dependent on God, Haroon al Rusheed, whom God hath set
in the place of vicegerent to his prophet, after his ancestors of
happy memory, to the potent and esteemed Raja of Serendib.

"We received your letter with joy, and send you this from our
imperial residence, the garden of superior wits. We hope when you
look upon it, you will perceive our good intention and be pleased
with it. Adieu."

The king of Serendib was highly gratified that the caliph
answered his friendship. A little time after this audience, I
solicited leave to depart, and had much difficulty to obtain it.
I procured it however at last, and the king, when he dismissed
me, made me a very considerable present. I embarked immediately
to return to Bagdad, but had not the good fortune to arrive there
so speedily as I had hoped. God ordered it otherwise.

Three or four days after my departure, we were attacked by
corsairs, who easily seized upon our ship, because it was no
vessel of force. Some of the crew offered resistance, which cost
them their lives. But for myself and the rest, who were not so
imprudent, the corsairs saved us on purpose to make slaves of us.

We were all stripped, and instead of our own clothes, they gave
us sorry rags, and carried us into a remote island, where they
sold us.

I fell into the hands of a rich merchant, who, as soon as he
bought me, carried me to his house, treated me well, and clad me
handsomely for a slave. Some days after, not knowing who I was,
he asked me if I understood any trade? I answered, that I was no
mechanic, but a merchant, and that the corsairs, who sold me, had
robbed me of all I possessed. "But tell me," replied he, "can you
shoot with a bow?" I answered, that the bow was one of my
exercises in my youth. He gave me a bow and arrows, and, taking
me behind him upon an elephant, carried me to a thick forest some
leagues from the town. We penetrated a great way into the wood,
and when he thought fit to stop, he bade me alight; then shewing
me a great tree, "Climb up that," said he, "and shoot at the
elephants as you see them pass by, for there is a prodigious
number of them in this forest, and if any of them fall, come and
give me notice." Having spoken thus, he left me victuals, and
returned to the town, and I continued upon the tree all night.

I saw no elephant during that time, but next morning, as soon as
the sun was up, I perceived a great number. I shot several arrows
among them, and at last one of the elephants fell, when the rest
retired immediately, and left me at liberty to go and acquaint my
patron with my booty. When I had informed him, he gave me a good
meal, commended my dexterity, and caressed me highly. We went
afterwards together to the forest, where we dug a hole for the
elephant; my patron designing to return when it was rotten, and
take his teeth to trade with.

I continued this employment for two months, and killed an
elephant every day, getting sometimes upon one tree, and
sometimes upon another. One morning, as I looked for the
elephants, I perceived with extreme amazement, that, instead of
passing by me across the forest as usual, they stopped, and came
to me with a horrible noise, in such number that the plain was
covered, and shook under them. They encompassed the tree in which
I was concealed, with their trunks extended, and all fixed their
eyes upon. At this alarming spectacle I continued immoveable, and
was so much terrified, that my bow and arrows fell out of my
hand.

My fears were not without cause; for after the elephants had
stared upon me some time, one of the largest of them put his
trunk round the foot of the tree, plucked it up, and threw it on
the ground; I fell with the tree, and the elephant taking me up
with his trunk, laid me on his back, where I sat more like one
dead than alive, with my quiver on my shoulder. He put himself
afterwards at the head of the rest, who followed him in troops,
carried me a considerable way, then laid me down on the ground,
and retired with all his companions. Conceive, if you can, the
condition I was in: I thought myself in a dream. After having
lain some time, and seeing the elephants gone, I got up, and
found I was upon a long and broad hill, almost covered with the
bones and teeth of elephants. I confess to you, that this object
furnished me with abundance of reflections. I admired the
instinct of those animals; I doubted not but that was their
burying place, and that they carried me thither on purpose to
tell me that I should forbear to persecute them, since I did it
only for their teeth. I did not stay on the hill, but turned
towards the city, and, after having travelled a day and a night,
I came to my patron. I met no elephant in my way, which made me
think they had retired farther into the forest, to leave me at
liberty to come back to the hill without any obstacle.

As soon as my patron saw me; "Ah, poor Sinbad," exclaimed he, "I
was in great trouble to know what was become of you. I have been
at the forest, where I found a tree newly pulled up, and a bow
and arrows on the ground, and after having sought for you in
vain, I despaired of ever, seeing you more. Pray tell me what
befell you, and by what good chance thou art still alive." I
satisfied his curiosity, and going both of us next morning to the
hill, he found to his great joy that what I had told him was
true. We loaded the elephant which had carried us with as many
teeth as he could bear; and when we were returned, "Brother,"
said my patron, "for I will treat you no more as my slave, after
having made such a discovery as will enrich me, God bless you
with all happiness and prosperity. I declare before him, that I
give you your liberty. I concealed from you what I am now going
to tell you.

"The elephants of our forest have every year killed us a great
many slaves, whom we sent to seek ivory. For all the cautions we
could give them, those crafty animals destroyed them one time or
other. God has delivered you from their fury, and has bestowed
that favour upon you only. It is a sign that he loves you, and
has some use for your service in the world. You have procured me
incredible wealth. Formerly we could not procure ivory but by
exposing the lives of our slaves, and now our whole city is
enriched by your means. Do not think I pretend to have rewarded
you by giving you your liberty, I will also give you considerable
riches. I could engage all our city to contribute towards making
your fortune, but I will have the glory of doing it myself."

To this obliging declaration I replied, "Patron, God preserve
you. Your giving me my liberty is enough to discharge what you
owe me, and I desire no other reward for the service I had the
good fortune to do to you and your city, but leave to return to
my own country." "Very well," said he, "the monsoon will in a
little time bring ships for ivory. I will then send you home, and
give you wherewith to bear your charges." I thanked him again for
my liberty and his good intentions towards me. I staid with him
expecting the monsoon; and during that time, we made so many
journeys to the hill, that we filled all our warehouses with
ivory. The other merchants, who traded in it, did the same, for
it could not be long concealed from them.

The ships arrived at last, and my patron, himself having made
choice of the ship wherein I was to embark, loaded half of it
with ivory on my account, laid in provisions in abundance for my
passage, and besides obliged me to accept a present of some
curiosities of the country of great value. After I had returned
him a thousand thanks for all his favours, I went aboard. We set
sail, and as the adventure which procured me this liberty was
very extraordinary, I had it continually in my thoughts.

We stopped at some islands to take in fresh provisions. Our
vessel being come to a port on the main land in the Indies, we
touched there, and not being willing to venture by sea to
Bussorah, I landed my proportion of the ivory, resolving to
proceed on my journey by land. I made vast sums of my ivory,
bought several rarities, which I intended for presents, and when
my equipage was ready, set out in company with a large caravan of
merchants. I was a long time on the way, and suffered much, but
endured all with patience, when I considered that I had nothing
to fear from the seas, from pirates, from serpents, or from the
other perils to which I had been exposed.

All these fatigues ended at last, and I arrived safe at Bagdad. I
went immediately to wait upon the caliph, and gave him an account
of my embassy. That prince said he had been uneasy, as I was so
long in returning, but that he always hoped God would preserve
me. When I told him the adventure of the elephants, he seemed
much surprised, and would never have given any credit to it had
he not known my veracity. He deemed this story, and the other
relations I had given him, to be so curious, that he ordered one
of his secretaries to write them in characters of gold, and lay
them up in his treasury. I retired well satisfied with the
honours I received, and the presents which he gave me; and ever
since I have devoted myself wholly to my family, kindred, and
friends.

Sinbad here finished the relation of his seventh and last voyage,
and then addressing himself to Hindbad, "Well, friend," said he,
"did you ever hear of any person that suffered so much as I have
done, or of any mortal that has gone through so many
vicissitudes? Is it not reasonable that, after all this I should
enjoy a quiet and pleasant life?" As he said this, Hindbad drew
near to him, and kissing his hand, said, "I must acknowledge,
sir, that you have gone through many imminent dangers; my
troubles are not comparable to yours: if they afflict me for a
time, I comfort myself with the thoughts of the profit I get by
them. You not only deserve a quiet life, but are worthy of all
the riches you enjoy, because you make of them such a good and
generous use. May you therefore continue to live in happiness and
joy till the day of your death!" Sinbad gave him one hundred
sequins more, received him into the number of his friends,
desired him to quit his porter's employment, and come and dine
every day with him, that he might have reason to remember Sinbad
the voyager.

